Simplify and standardise README (#284)
CDCgov/cfa-epinow2-pipeline: README.md

It includes helper functions to:

* Interface with Azure services
* Convert input data to the expected `{EpiNow2}` input format
* Save outputs in standardized formats
* Add logging and metadata

The package supports deployment in CFA's computational environment.
While the code is open source, it may not support use outside CFA's infrastructure.

## Project Admin

- [@micahwiesner67](https://github.com/micahwiesner67)
- [@zsusswein](https://github.com/zsusswein)
- [@natemcintosh](https://github.com/natemcintosh)
- [@kgostic](https://github.com/kgostic)

## Structure

This repository contains the R package `{CFAEpiNow2Pipeline}` and follows standard R package conventions.
All PRs must pass `R CMD CHECK` as part of the CI pipeline before merging to main.
See `CONTRIBUTING.md` for details on contributing to the repository.

The package provides adapters and wrappers to run multiple `{EpiNow2}` models in parallel using cloud resources.
It reads from a standardized input format and writes to a standardized output format.
It enhances `{EpiNow2}` to support cloud deployments, further logging, and standardization of the R environment.

> Note: This package standardizes how `{EpiNow2}` integrates into CFA's pipeline but does _not_ manage pipeline deployment or kickoff, data extraction and transformation, or output visualization.

Author: The suggested sentence doesn't read. It should be "but does not manage (post-processing and so on)" (but it does manage deployment basically).

## Components

This package implements functions for:

1. [**Configuration**](https://cdcgov.github.io/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/reference/index.html#configuration): Loads parameters (e.g. prior distributions, generation intervals, right truncation) from a config passed at runtime.

>     - Configs are validated at runtime, but generated outside this package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Configs are validated at runtime, but generated in [a separate microservice](https://github.com/[CDCgov/cfa-config-generator](https://github.com/CDCgov/cfa-config-generator)).
```

Author: Link looks wrong

> 1. [**Data load**]((https://cdcgov.github.io/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/reference/index.html#azure)): Reads input data from the CFA data lake or from a local environment and formats it for input to `{EpiNow2}`.

Author: And at start there is a (

>     - Paths are specified via the config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Paths to data files are specified via the config.
```

1. [**Parameters**](https://cdcgov.github.io/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/reference/index.html#parameter): Loads validated generation interval, delay interval, and right truncation distributions from from the CFA data lake or from a local environment and formats them for use in `{EpiNow2}`.
1. [**Model run**](https://cdcgov.github.io/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/reference/index.html#pipeline): Manages R environment to run `{EpiNow2}` from a fixed random seed for both `{EpiNow2}` initialization and Stan sampling.
1. [**Outputs**](https://cdcgov.github.io/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/reference/index.html#write-output): Processes `{EpiNow2}` model fits to a standardized flat output format.

>     - In the pipeline, full model fits are saved as `.rds` files, as well as via this flat output format.

Author: [Address ZS comment](https://github.com/CDCgov/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/pull/284/commits/1ec6911b50812a6dbad6ceeb6aa19c550a0c66c2)

1. **Metadata**: Extracts and saves metadata on the model run alongside model outputs.

The [`{cli}`](https://github.com/r-lib/cli) package is used for detailed R-style logging throughout.

## Output format

This package standardizes `{EpiNow2}` outputs into samples and summary tables, saving them (along with relevant metadata and logs) in a consistent directory structure.

> Outputs feed into downstream post-processing (e.g. plotting, scoring, analysis) pipelines.

Author: [More ZS comment](https://github.com/CDCgov/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/pull/284/commits/0a1bbd72c3f84ae28a4dda08c81ce9aba3ec688a)

1. **Metadata**: Extracts and saves metadata on the model run alongside model outputs.

The [`{cli}`](https://github.com/r-lib/cli) package is used for detailed R-style logging throughout.

## Output format

The end goals of this package is to standardize the raw outputs from EpiNow2 into samples and summaries tables, and to write those standardized outputs, along with relevant metadata, logs, etc. to a standard directory structure. Once in CFA's standard format, the outputs can be passed into a separate pipeline that handles post-processing (e.g. plotting, scoring, analysis) of Rt estimates from several different Rt estimation models.
This package standardizes `{EpiNow2}` outputs into samples and summary tables, saving them along with metadata and logs in a consistent directory structure.
Outputs feed into a downstream post-processing pipeline (for e.g. plotting, scoring, and further analysis).

### Structure

### Directories
Outputs are organized by job and task IDs to support automated and manual review workflows.
The job ID refers to a collection of models run together.
The task ID corresponds to a specific model instance.

> The nested partitioning structure of the outputs is designed to facilitate both automated processes and manual investigation: files are organized by job and task IDs, allowing for efficient file operations using glob patterns, while also maintaining a clear hierarchy that aids human users in navigating to specific results or logs. Files meant primarily for machine-readable consumption (i.e., draws, summaries, diagnostics) are structured together to make globbing easier. Files meant primarily for human investigation (i.e., logs, model fit object) are grouped together by task to facilitate manual workflows.

Reviewer 2: I actually like the text that you deleted here. Unless this information is elsewhere I think we should include it here.

In particular, the section on [dealing with truncation](https://epiforecasts.io/EpiNow2/articles/estimate_infections.html#truncation) may be helpful.

We return the following `{EpiNow2}` Stan model quantities (as samples and summaries):

1. `reports[t]`: Expected nowcasted case count. Processed as `expected_nowcast_cases`.
1. `imputed_reports[t]`: Posterior-predicted nowcasted case count. [Generated](https://github.com/epiforecasts/EpiNow2/blob/4ec087b37cd85b572cb4daa8b4f177bf85f0a84a/inst/stan/estimate_infections.stan#L281-L290) by applying Poisson or negative binomial noise to the expected nowcasted case count. Processed as `pp_nowcast_cases`.
1. `obs_reports[t]`: Expected right-truncated case count. [Generated](https://github.com/epiforecasts/EpiNow2/blob/4ec087b37cd85b572cb4daa8b4f177bf85f0a84a/inst/stan/estimate_infections.stan#L169-L185) by truncating the expected nowcasted case count. Processed as `expected_obs_cases`.
1. `R[t]`: The time-varying effective reproduction number. Processed as `Rt`.
1. `r[t]` The instantaneous growth rate at time $t$. Processed as `growth_rate`.

## Running the pipeline

> ### Locally

Author: Oops, you're right, Sloppy! Here's another go [Makefile corrections](https://github.com/CDCgov/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/pull/284/commits/7e0cbc02bb66944f76b3316fa663d344a5b31365)

> ### Locally

Reviewer: Looks good!

    - `summarized_<task_id>.parquet`: Summarized quantiles for a specific task ID.  Columns are: `job_id`, `task_id`, `geo_value`, `disease`, `model`, `value`, `_lower`, `_upper`, `_width`, `_point`, `_interval`, and `reference_date`, following the [`{tidybayes}`](https://mjskay.github.io/tidybayes/articles/tidybayes.html) specification.
  - `diagnostics/`: Contains model fit diagnostics for all tasks in the job.
    - `diagnostic_<task_id>.parquet`: Diagnostics relevant for a specific task ID. Columns are: `diagnostic`, `value`, `job_id`, `task_id`, `geo_value`, `disease`, and `model`.
  - `tasks/`: Contains one folder per task. These are primarily for manual review rather than automated processing.
    - `task_<task_id>/`: A task-specific folder with:
      - `model.rds`: The fitted `{EpiNow2}` model object.
      - `metadata.json`: Metadata about the task run.
      - `stdout.log`: Standard output log file.
      - `stderr.log`: Standard error log file.
- `job_metadata.json`: Metadata about the overall job, stored at the top level of the job directory.

### Model-estimated quantities

We use the `{EpiNow2}` model to correct for reporting delays in the observed time series data.

> For more details about the model, see the vignette for [`EpiNow2::estimate_infections()`](https://epiforecasts.io/EpiNow2/articles/estimate_infections.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details about the model, see the vignette for [`EpiNow2::estimate_infections()`](https://epiforecasts.io/EpiNow2/articles/estimate_infections.html) and in particular the ["Truncation" sub-section](https://epiforecasts.io/EpiNow2/articles/estimate_infections.html#truncation).
```

Author: [More ZS](https://github.com/CDCgov/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/pull/284/commits/f08418573cf4a18c7edaad06271a89e4efb612f3)

In our outputs, we include the following quantities:

1. `stan_name`: What the quantity is
1. `stan_name`: What the quantity is
1. `stan_name`: What the quantity is

> 1. `stan_name`: What the quantity is

Reviewer: I don't think these Stan-level parameters are defined anywhere in the EpiNow2 docs. If you can find them somewhere I think we should link to them. Otherwise, we should stick them somewhere in our docs and link there. Also ideally, we could pass up to the EpiNow2 docs.

> 1. `stan_name`: What the quantity is

Author: I agree that we should put these things in our package docs rather than in our README.

> 1. `stan_name`: What the quantity is

Author: Example issue: https://github.com/CDCgov/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/issues/292

> 1. `stan_name`: What the quantity is

Author: [Link out to our docs](https://github.com/CDCgov/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/pull/284/commits/17971e203645c50f3a0e96d497342723e44f397b)

> 1. `stan_name`: What the quantity is

Reviewer: I don't think this should be out-of-scope here. Either this PR should preserve the text in the README we want to move or it should do the move. It shouldn't cut the text and not implement a solution.

> 1. `stan_name`: What the quantity is

Reviewer: I used it literally yesterday! So if I count as "people", then there's at some use.

## Running the pipeline

### Locally

The [`Makefile`](Makefile) may be used to build containers and run the pipeline locally using:

1. `make deps` builds a container image with all the dependencies required to build the R package.
1. `make build` builds the R package.

> 1. `make interactive` launches the image in interactive mode.

Reviewer: Is it not `make up`?

Author: Could be

Author: Indeed it has been changed [Replace make deps with make up](https://github.com/CDCgov/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/pull/284/commits/ebdcc3a69ff8434cd48ca474e758463267996e4f)

These targets depend on the environment variables:

> 1. `CNTR_MGR`: The container manager. Defaults to `docker`. Other options include `podman`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `CNTR_MGR`: The container manager. Defaults to `docker`. The option `podman` is also allowed if present locally on the system. Note that there can be some incompatibilities between `podman` and Azure services.
```

> 2. `TAG`: A tag used for the container. Defaults to `local`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. `TAG`: The tag used for the image. Defaults to the name of the branch.
```

The default repository is cfaprdbatchcr.azurecr.io.

> <!--- Don't we need to do `make deps` first? --->

Author: Need to get this resolved before merge!

> <!--- Don't we need to do `make deps` first? --->

Reviewer 2: @athowes If you look at the Makefile there actually isn't a `make deps` target anymore. That was specifically when we had the two step build, but no longer. 
You will need to run `make pull` first though, to pull an image from the container registry to be used locally

> <!--- Don't we need to do `make deps` first? --->

Author: I've made edits in [Update target names](https://github.com/CDCgov/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/pull/284/commits/63e1817a13dc5107f25ad48917c43525c86c4a37)

For example, to build a dependency image using `podman` and the `latest` tag:

```bash

> make build CNTR_MGR=podman TAG=zs-pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
make build CNTR_MGR=podman TAG=latest
```

```

This is equivalent to running:

```bash
podman build -t cfaprdbatchcr.azurecr.io/cfa-epinow2-pipeline:zs-pipeline \
    --build-arg TAG=zs-pipeline -f Dockerfile
```

Then, to run interactively:

```bash
make interactive TAG=zs-pipeline
```

> <!--- Is it not a problem that we use docker now after making the image with podman --->

Reviewer: I believe it would? But I don't use podman -- maybe a question for @micahwiesner67?

> <!--- Is it not a problem that we use docker now after making the image with podman --->

Author: Need to get this resolved before merge!

> <!--- Is it not a problem that we use docker now after making the image with podman --->

Reviewer 2: I don't believe that's an issue. Container images are compatible between podman and docker

> <!--- Is it not a problem that we use docker now after making the image with podman --->

Author: [Remove concern](https://github.com/CDCgov/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/pull/284/commits/c7561765e9d2c98f95ea371f5704503f13b9d8a1)

This is equivalent to running:

```bash
docker run \
    -v/wherever/your/pwd/is:/cfa-epinow2-pipeline -it --rm \

>     cfaprdbatchcr.azurecr.io/cfa-epinow2-pipeline:zs-pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    cfaprdbatchcr.azurecr.io/cfa-epinow2-pipeline:latest
```

```

**Note**: The default value of `CNTR_MGR` is `docker`!
This means that...

> ### Automation

Author: Also here: https://github.com/CDCgov/cfa-epinow2-pipeline/issues/294
